---
lang: "en"
title: "Some History About the Computer and Me"
date: 2025-12-27 02:25 +0800
tags: ["Featured"]
---

At the beginning, one of my relatives gave me an old OEM PC. That's my first real full-functional computer. My parents are holding onto the negative opinions at that time, but I at least owned something when I was 13(or 12?) years old.

My first teacher would be Minecraft, I think. Configure the java dev kit, and figure out how to use Windows 10 is a pretty challenging task for me. My friends and I want to play together, so I’m also studying how to use NAT traveling out of school.

I was born in 2009, the last gen z. Everyone was talking more about phones in my childhood. People talking, using, playing, and controlling the dumb or smart phones. Even though I still have some memories about optical disks and other things before the internet grew up.

Back then, we even tried variants of apps to run the Minecraft java version on Android for some reason(we didn’t have a PC). Tech barrier could never block tech studying.

Some others will say I have a little old-school, but that might be my practices: walk through the history once and understand where we are today. For example, I have used Nginx as reverse proxy for a long time before replacing it with Caddy.

Funny retro but not old atmosphere.

The afterword of the story was: Playing some video game and being blamed; Have been asked why I need VSCode on that computer; Following a series of stupid java tutorial videos, but have done nothing. So I never watch any long video tutorials after that.

I also had to build some physical electronic "stuff", but that part was boring.

## After started trying Linux

Why not to learn about other OS, or some other more serious programming languages? I don't want to stop at being a tech lover. That's why I decided to learn about Linux and C between 2022 and 2024.

My first Linux distro is Ubuntu, which is the end of 2022(probably?). Like every regular person, it's hard. There was a desktop edition, but I use it as a server on a pretty useless PC. This is fun, but did nothing related to "server". And I started using Debian as my day-to-day system more than six months ago.

After another six months, I had learned a lot about how to do daily tasks with Debian. Really stable distro, until you accidentally uninstall VirtualBox the wrong way. After that, I wanted to challenge myself a little and also for learning more fundamental things. In August 2023, I spent a whole night migrating my PC to Arch Linux.

In that year, I tried to jailbreak a stock Nintendo Switch. Soldered an existing hacking board and cooking some software from the community. But be honest, pricey games are not enjoyable. I’m not a genius, so I didn’t code something for that.\
There is an article for that: [从头破解 Nintendo Switch 的总结与心得]({{ site.baseurl }}/posts/简体中文/2024/04/23/从头破解NintendoSwitch的总结与心得)

At that time, I was very familiar with shell, but still knew nothing about real programming, *even Python*. So in 2024, I bought a book called C Primer Plus, and started learning and practicing C.

I would say attempting to do some jailbreaks every year is great. Even if they look small.\
Article: [在 Chromebook 上安装完整 Linux 发行版的方法总结]({{ site.baseurl }}/posts2/2024/06/Linux-for-Chromebook)

In 2025, I’m focused on networking and cloud. I’m more and more seriously managing my website and domain on Cloudflare. Trying to use AWS at surface(who can master that mess `:|`). And... I also learned the Go language as my primary choice to build something.

In this context, I swapped my PC and server OS with Red Hat Linux family in October 2025 :>

## Why do I write this post?

There is a previous page of this blog, called "The Computer Science" under the "about" page. I hid it so deep and have a lot of useless stuff randomly. So I decided to organize them and add some more content to fill this empty December for me...

Networking, javascript, and the frontend are boring this year...
